README.md, before:

This file is still being populated with notes from previous
experiments.  Pardon our dust.

### Takeaways so far:

* With f_N(x) the fourier transform of the indicator function of a_n (in the Steinberger's sense), f_N(alpha) grows linearly in N. 

* Possibly alpha_(x,x+1) = pi for x that are >= 12 and are even

* Possibly alpha_(1,x) -> 0 as x -> infinity

* The a_i are very unusually biased mod 540, and generally are biased
  modulo the denominators of the continued fraction convergents of
  alpha

* In general, if we're imagining alpha = 2pi*k/m (where k is related
  to the set of favoured congruence classes mod m), then there are
  several available choices for k but only one that gives the apparent
  continuity observed.  For example, 10839*alpha mod 2pi =
  5.9926... works about as well as alpha for giving a peak in the
  Fourier transform.

* How likely a_n is to be used as a summand of a later a_i is not at
  all random, but appears instead to be correlated with the value of
  cos(alpha*a_n)

* The set of i for which a_n appears as a summand appears to have
  fixed density, whose numerical value is somehow correlated with
  cos(alpha*a_n).

### 20151220 Linearity of f_N in N



### 20151221 More alphas

We compute these in `experiment1` and `experiment2`

```
Format: a1 a2 (optimal alpha, approximated to four decimal places, ||F_200||^2 (only meaningful if orders of magnitude bigger than 200))

1 2 (2.571600000001008, 23348.35938929195)
1 3 (2.8334000000015607, 24293.720371257674)
1 4 (2.094400000000001, 39007.46385460891)
1 5 (1.7648999999998278, 26597.042612213307)
1 6 (4.833200000002081, 32338.778040479963)
1 7 (0.32669999999998606, 24192.1315190365)
1 8 (0.2736999999999919, 25928.99448125898)
1 9 (6.038099999999273, 26372.972667249553)
1 10 (6.061699999999218, 25717.807140737834)
1 11 (6.083299999999167, 25743.731352831754)
1 12 (6.101599999999125, 25737.80981551202)
1 13 (6.115499999999092, 25926.87112676625)
1 14 (6.124499999999071, 25983.886809829368)
1 15 (6.135699999999045, 25647.874299833387)
1 16 (6.1453999999990225, 26048.466535913547)
1 17 (6.155099999999, 26086.336559974516)
1 18 (6.158099999998993, 26167.0885135168)
1 19 (6.166099999998974, 26600.041630256266)
1 20 (6.174099999998956, 25678.082435323184)
1 2 (2.571600000001008, 23348.35938929195)
2 3 (1.1841999999998918, 16192.09475962663)
3 4 (5.380900000000804, 26414.80301587582)
4 5 (5.600000000000294, 21640.564248470706)
5 6 (2.0588999999999262, 22783.571558654858)
6 7 (2.6889000000012557, 19502.053865731123)
7 8 (3.9426000000039014, 23910.35721534735)
8 9 (3.490300000002947, 19172.229899792306)
9 10 (5.955799999999464, 13422.672633312626)
10 11 (3.4270000000028134, 17537.29505082042)
11 12 (6.00919999999934, 14069.21195102112)
12 13 (3.141600000002211, 17955.65635464096)
13 14 (2.9106000000017236, 18768.829084251494)
14 15 (3.141600000002211, 19043.701112532486)
15 16 (2.940100000001786, 15916.092915960573)
16 17 (3.141600000002211, 23103.745481433194)
17 18 (2.963400000001835, 17551.757008092867)
18 19 (3.141600000002211, 21903.769889105457)
19 20 (6.123199999999074, 15870.335860431833)
```

So for example, when a1 = 12, a2 = 13, it looks like alpha = pi, which seems to be confirmed for this particular instance by computing more terms and searching with more precision.  This is saying that the a_i are very biased mod 2pi/pi = 2, which seems experimentally to be very much the case even out to thousands of terms (for this particular example): the a_i are over 80% odd.  Proving something in this direction seems accessible, but some first efforts were unfruitful.

Note for example
  that in the extreme case where a_i = r mod m for all i, |f_N(2pi/m)|
  will be N on the nose.  If instead a_i is only ever congruent to r
  or s mod m, then if k = 1/(r-s) mod m, then again |f_N(2pi*k/m)| is
  close to N.

In general, one could imagine that for whatever initial values, the existence of such alpha is saying the a_i prefer a set of congruence classes mod m for some (possibly large) m.  In this case, alpha could be 2pi*k/m for some k.  (To see what k is, think what happens if the a_i happen to biased toward only two congruence classes r and s modulo m, then k would be such that kr and ks are all as close as possible mod m, say k = 1/(s-r) mod m.  If the preference is for more than two congruence classes, then the choice of k seems complicated (though still elementary): Given r1, ... rM mod m, find the k such that the k*r_i are all "as tightly clustered as possible".  There could be multiple k that do the job well, even if one of them is the very best.


### 20151221 Continued fractions


It is more likely that there is a sequence of m mod which the
congruence classes of a_i are increasingly clustered.  The continued
fraction of 2pi/alpha, which we're imagining is m/k, doesn't have some
really large coefficient where we would obviously truncate it.
Instead, for 2pi/alpha_(1,2) it is just

```[2; 2, 3, 1, 11, 1, 1, 4, 1, 1, 7, 2, 2, 6, 5, 3, 1, 3, 1, 2, 1, 3, 2, 1, 14, 2, 5, 3, 2, 3, 1, 2, 13, 2]```

For most of the alpha(i,j) that we computed to any meaningful
precision, either this continues to be true, or there is a very small
obvious modulus like 2.


There may not be a single best m: For example, one could imagine a sequence that is slightly biased to being odd, say 60% are 1 mod 2.  But then in fact it turns out that mod 4, it is more strongly biased, with 65% being only 2 or 3 mod 4.  And maybe in fact mod 12, 80% of terms are only ever 2, 3, 6, or 8 mod 12, and maybe in fact 99% are 2, 3, 6, 8, or 1 mod 48, and maybe you can catch more and more of the sequence with a slowly expanding set of congruence classes modulo quickly growing modulus.  If there is a "bias mod m" thing happening, this is probably the flavour it takes, but I'm happy to try to treat the approximation to alpha as indicating an "at least some bias toward some congruence classes mod some fixed m" phenomenon.

```
Format: c < 41000,  c*alpha mod 2pi,  |f_1000(c*alpha)| if "large enough"

1 2.5714474995 792.4132845820646
5421 3.7118834651791985 697.9602738649951
5423 2.571593156997551 667.6433815922704
10843 3.7120291226783593 430.5852814483841
10845 2.5717388144948927 382.76395161416815
19246 3.711096030579938 188.76234341111504
27109 3.7124660951667465 192.74127423547188
27111 2.572175787005108 192.3664947764681
30090 3.7113873455818975 251.33288416753032
30092 2.571097037391155 299.91484894398576
35512 3.7115330030792393 564.7163838117917
35514 2.5712426948884968 604.3427231679284
40934 3.711678660576581 767.1522122115849
40936 2.5713883524003904 780.2228219170503
```

### 20151229 Subgroup considerations

One possible source of bias mod 540 (say) would be if a_n tended to
miss certain whole subgroups mod 540.  This seems kind of attractive
based on the fact that 540 has a lot of divisors (though this isn't
always true of the other denominators in the continued fraction
expansion) and so Z/540 has many subgroups.  If, for example, at some
point it turned out that all the elements of the sequence were a fixed
list of subgroups mod 540, then because to generate future elements
all we do is add previous elements, we could only ever climb the
subgroup lattice and might continue to miss subgroups not containing
the ones we've seen.

Of course, this idea as stated is a non-starter because a_1 = 1
generates the whole group.  However, in the first 10000 terms, 1 only
shows up as a summand as 2+1, 3+1, and 47+1 and then never again, so
maybe some approximate version of this is true.

We compute using `experiment9`: 


```
Format: divisor of 540, number of a_n in that subgroup, number of integers 1..10000 in that subgroup
1 : 2625 =? 2666
2 : 1342 =? 1333
3 : 916 =? 888
4 : 1351 =? 1333
5 : 667 =? 666
6 : 443 =? 444
9 : 289 =? 296
10 : 346 =? 333
12 : 416 =? 444
15 : 228 =? 222
18 : 170 =? 148
20 : 334 =? 333
27 : 187 =? 148
30 : 104 =? 111
36 : 126 =? 148
45 : 90 =? 74
54 : 31 =? 74
60 : 104 =? 111
90 : 0 =? 37
108 : 89 =? 74
135 : 1 =? 37
180 : 75 =? 37
270 : 66 =? 18
540 : 0 =? 18
```

Notably, for 540, everything seems to show up about as often as
predicted except for 90, 135, and 540, which, surprisingly, show up
basically never.

We note that the absence of 90 is truly a "mod 540" phenomenon, since
mod 270, say, the elements that generate the subgroup generated by 180
mod 540 will be in the subgroup generated by 90 by 270, so we will get
about the expected number of these.  However, 135 is still absent mod
270.

This phenomenon is not really strong enough to account for the
substantial bias observed, however, and nor does it happen uniformly
among denominators of the continued fraction.  For 259, we observe: 

```
1 : 8381 =? 8339
7 : 1360 =? 1389
37 : 216 =? 231
259 : 43 =? 38
```

```
1 : 9051 =? 9057
11 : 909 =? 905
271 : 40 =? 33
2981 : 0 =? 3
```

```
1 : 4934 =? 4932
2 : 2468 =? 2466
4 : 2470 =? 2466
139 : 36 =? 35
157 : 33 =? 31
278 : 15 =? 17
314 : 19 =? 15
556 : 13 =? 17
628 : 12 =? 15
21823 : 0 =? 0
43646 : 0 =? 0
87292 : 0 =? 0
```

So why it is exactly that 90 and 135 never show up mod 540 is unclear,
but this could be random (they never showed up to begin with, and so
are unlikely to show up in future) and this isn't the cause of the
bias, most likely.

It is perhaps not terribly surprising that this isn't the answer:
clustering into two peaks mod 540 is not a particularly
algebraic-sounding phenomenon.

### 20151230 Evolving a distribution

Another possible source of the bias mod 540 is that some level of bias
simply happens by accident for a_i < 540 (maybe it is expected for at
least some modulus) and then, once you have this distribution, making
the next element of the sequence by picking two elements randomly from
this distribution (e.g. around 249 and 349 are the two peaks mod 540,
so maybe it's likely to pick e.g. 249 + 349 for the next congruence
class).

Under this assumption, we can evolve the distribution which starts
(using the first 10000 elements) like:

![initial distribution](figs/dist221,540.png)

and, under this evolution, gets smeared out to: 

![initial distribution](figs/dist221,540_ev.png)

Also unsurprising, but at least worth checking.

### 20151230 A correlation between summands and cos(alpha*a_n)

We note with interest the observation in the abstract of Steinerberger
that cos(alpha*a_n) < 0 for all a_n other than 2, 3, 47, and 69.  In
particular, thee were also the a_n that showed up most frequently as
summands in our earlier computation.

So we compute which how often each a_n appears as the smaller summand
of a later a_i and we compute cos(alpha*a_n) for each and sort by this
quantity.  We note what looks like a very strong correlation between
how often a_n shows up as a summand and cos(alpha*a_n) in the
resulting table, computed by `experiment11`:

```
Format: a_n, # a_i such that a_n is the smaller summand of a_i, cos(alpha_{1,2} * a_n) [a_i : a_i = a_n + a_*]

2 3630 0.41733070262870486 [6, 8, 13, 18, 28, 38, 99, 177, 182, 221, 238, ...
3 1356 0.13918577174048308 [11, 16, 72, 102, 148, 180, 209, 241, 319, 412, ...
47 1190 0.09314945116148635 [236, 253, 356, 363, 429, 456, 544, 720, 732, ...
69 999 0.07005004608158771 [175, 258, 451, 483, 566, 820, 1018, 1052, 1101, ...
102 836 -0.03533426907901862 [282, 441, 502, 585, 624, 646, 668, 949, 1125, ...
339 589 -0.0711987488469575 [695, 739, 751, 861, 905, 1186, 1230, 1770, 1853, ...
36 465 -0.10468116468523993 [138, 309, 602, 927, 1191, 1550, 1682, 2090, 2288, ...
273 305 -0.1403260484112354 [612, 673, 685, 1164, 1296, 1308, 1428, 1660, 1765, ...
8 181 -0.15065198092326257 [26, 36, 77, 114, 197, 324, 390, 991, 1470, 1602, ...
2581 85 -0.28740411578013597 [5795, 7459, 8947, 9443, 9619, 9641, 9663, 10677, ...
400 55 -0.2884371848720607 [3214, 3605, 3991, 12763, 13562, 13799, 13931, 15160, ...
983 50 -0.3160870169407304 [2445, 2748, 5514, 9553, 16121, 17135, 19427, 21626, ...
97 47 -0.3204537967301412 [316, 370, 497, 1252, 2581, 3622, 4057, 10366, 13628, ...
356 21 -0.33249578951071784 [983, 4118, 11226, 22676, 27817, 34104, 34969, 52789, ...
1155 16 -0.34664508490498336 [4878, 9132, 13733, 16047, 27883, 30886, 38920, 40931, ...
206 33 -0.35210835605364843 [522, 891, 1155, 1514, 2787, 4324, 9399, 11432, 20375, ...
53 35 -0.36400375717687433 [155, 409, 1208, 3038, 5049, 8421, 14945, 16648, 19480, ...
1308 18 -0.3694282571996273 [3029, 8368, 10501, 20937, 29147, 34784, 37765, 61029, ...
9193 8 -0.39212546438962775 [20419, 68914, 74099, 83323, 92073, 108317, 123718, 124864]
10831 4 -0.4275703245958347 [31878, 56503, 89101, 126493]
13 6 -0.4278336499870973 [82, 219, 273, 19642, 59734, 91748]
14892 2 -0.43270258250883076 [41620, 84500]
13531 3 -0.4379518060471682 [47279, 61451, 83139]
23883 2 -0.4409365382548865 [65740, 106394]
10269 1 -0.4463455890816818 [44816]
8368 1 -0.4494994835242297 [20968]
20643 0 -0.45329707066551345 []
316 5 -0.4579687420768522 [2897, 9509, 37809, 44377, 45132]
30315 1 -0.4603261098428447 [64928]
3205 1 -0.46097252485489365 [89057]
56437 0 -0.4623937767448221 []
4118 0 -0.46422907716529205 []
10247 0 -0.46696423929912617 []
3038 2 -0.4683040193517334 [7156, 95616]
57 3 -0.46925689465650167 [126, 339, 9250]
483 1 -0.4712894777269175 [80891]
60665 0 -0.4719075620475581 []
63646 0 -0.47285836474034365 []
39912 1 -0.4732674578528013 [128969]
1023 3 -0.47331956082924576 [2178, 20643, 65705]
69608 0 -0.4747583182234548 []
47920 0 -0.4752710197227344 []
123683 0 -0.47626799121658503 []
33274 1 -0.48172182638061584 [97956]
11586 0 -0.4822323173406816 []
75706 0 -0.482256288588461 []
128969 0 -0.48251534075104174 []
3723 1 -0.4834321003782536 [34038]
39653 1 -0.484451819395134 [84469]
42217 0 -0.484555301907165 []
```

If nothing else, this might suggest to us how to compute more a_n more
quickly: Rather than searching previous summands in order, search in
the order given by using cos(alpha*a_n) as the index.  Once we find a
sum that is unique, we only have to search all smaller sums, again in
this order.  This isn't easy, but 

## 20151231 Experiment 7, revisited

`experiment7` now uses a new (hopefully more refined) method for
computing alpha for various sequences and gives, after about a 5
minute computation for each:

```
1,2 (2.5714479999999997, 1586.3495100297046)
1,3 (2.8334960000000002, 1587.3716251000853)
2,3 (1.184224, 1497.1305405102953)
12,13 (3.141592, 1847.9732996138823)
```

We note that alpha_{2,3} is different from that in Steinberger.
Unclear whether this is a programming error or another peak or what.

### 20151231 Frequency of a_n as a summand, revisited

We run `experiment11(u1_2, alpha1_2)` to compute 

```
python test.py | grep '^2 ' | sed 's/.*[[]//;s/]//;s/, /\n/g'|nl -ba > ss2
python test.py | grep '^3 ' | sed 's/.*[[]//;s/]//;s/, /\n/g'|nl -ba > ss3
```

The data for i such that a_i = 2 + a_n (some n) is plotted here: 

![indices of elements with 2 as a summand](figs/ss2.png)

and for the a_i with 3, 47, 69, etc. as summands:

![indices of elements with 3 as a summand](figs/ss3.png)
![indices of elements with 47 as a summand](figs/ss47.png)
![indices of elements with 69 as a summand](figs/ss69.png)
![indices of elements with 102 as a summand](figs/ss102.png)
![indices of elements with 273 as a summand](figs/ss273.png)

Looks quite linear.  Indeed, computing the lines of best fit like:

```
gnuplot> f(x) = a*x+b
gnuplot> fit f(x) "data/ss2" u 1:2 via a,b
```

we get:

```
a_n   line of best fit      density of i with a_n a summand of a_i
=================================================================
2:    2.73325 x + 89.98     .36586481295161437848
3:    7.39206 x - 68.4331   .13528028722710584059
47:   8.21144 x + 103.419   .12178131971980553958
69:   10.0008 x + 130.561   .09999200063994880409
102:  11.9520 x + 16.9218   .08366800535475234270
273:  17.0196 x - 58.678    .05875578744506333873
36:   21.1842 x + 117.105   .04720499239999622360
339:  33.4172 x - 5.79674   .02992470943107142429
8:    57.7111 x - 229.248   .01732768912739490323
2581: 112.838 x - 415.223   .00886226271291586167
```

We can take these densities against the values of cos(alpha*x) and plot them: 

```
0.41733070262870486    .36586481295161437848
0.13918577174048308    .13528028722710584059
0.09314945116148635    .12178131971980553958
0.07005004608158771    .09999200063994880409
-0.03533426907901862   .08366800535475234270
-0.0711987488469575    .05875578744506333873
-0.10468116468523993   .04720499239999622360
-0.1403260484112354    .02992470943107142429
-0.15065198092326257   .01732768912739490323
-0.28740411578013597   .00886226271291586167
```

![plot of density against cos(ax)](figs/cos_density_correlation.png)

There is a definite correlation, but it isn't linear or particularly
obvious what the quantitative relationship is (particularly with this
small dataset).

Commit message:

more experimentation about summand frequency

README.md, after:

This file is still being populated with notes from previous
experiments.  Pardon our dust.

### Takeaways so far:

* With f_N(x) the fourier transform of the indicator function of a_n (in the Steinberger's sense), f_N(alpha) grows linearly in N. 

* Possibly alpha_(x,x+1) = pi for x that are >= 12 and are even

* Possibly alpha_(1,x) -> 0 as x -> infinity

* The a_i are very unusually biased mod 540, and generally are biased
  modulo the denominators of the continued fraction convergents of
  alpha

* In general, if we're imagining alpha = 2pi*k/m (where k is related
  to the set of favoured congruence classes mod m), then there are
  several available choices for k but only one that gives the apparent
  continuity observed.  For example, 10839*alpha mod 2pi =
  5.9926... works about as well as alpha for giving a peak in the
  Fourier transform.

* How likely a_n is to be used as a summand of a later a_i is not at
  all random, but appears instead to be correlated with the value of
  cos(alpha*a_n)

* The set of i for which a_n appears as a summand appears to have
  fixed density, whose numerical value is somehow correlated with
  cos(alpha*a_n).

### 20151220 Linearity of f_N in N



### 20151221 More alphas

We compute these in `experiment1` and `experiment2`

```
Format: a1 a2 (optimal alpha, approximated to four decimal places, ||F_200||^2 (only meaningful if orders of magnitude bigger than 200))

1 2 (2.571600000001008, 23348.35938929195)
1 3 (2.8334000000015607, 24293.720371257674)
1 4 (2.094400000000001, 39007.46385460891)
1 5 (1.7648999999998278, 26597.042612213307)
1 6 (4.833200000002081, 32338.778040479963)
1 7 (0.32669999999998606, 24192.1315190365)
1 8 (0.2736999999999919, 25928.99448125898)
1 9 (6.038099999999273, 26372.972667249553)
1 10 (6.061699999999218, 25717.807140737834)
1 11 (6.083299999999167, 25743.731352831754)
1 12 (6.101599999999125, 25737.80981551202)
1 13 (6.115499999999092, 25926.87112676625)
1 14 (6.124499999999071, 25983.886809829368)
1 15 (6.135699999999045, 25647.874299833387)
1 16 (6.1453999999990225, 26048.466535913547)
1 17 (6.155099999999, 26086.336559974516)
1 18 (6.158099999998993, 26167.0885135168)
1 19 (6.166099999998974, 26600.041630256266)
1 20 (6.174099999998956, 25678.082435323184)
1 2 (2.571600000001008, 23348.35938929195)
2 3 (1.1841999999998918, 16192.09475962663)
3 4 (5.380900000000804, 26414.80301587582)
4 5 (5.600000000000294, 21640.564248470706)
5 6 (2.0588999999999262, 22783.571558654858)
6 7 (2.6889000000012557, 19502.053865731123)
7 8 (3.9426000000039014, 23910.35721534735)
8 9 (3.490300000002947, 19172.229899792306)
9 10 (5.955799999999464, 13422.672633312626)
10 11 (3.4270000000028134, 17537.29505082042)
11 12 (6.00919999999934, 14069.21195102112)
12 13 (3.141600000002211, 17955.65635464096)
13 14 (2.9106000000017236, 18768.829084251494)
14 15 (3.141600000002211, 19043.701112532486)
15 16 (2.940100000001786, 15916.092915960573)
16 17 (3.141600000002211, 23103.745481433194)
17 18 (2.963400000001835, 17551.757008092867)
18 19 (3.141600000002211, 21903.769889105457)
19 20 (6.123199999999074, 15870.335860431833)
```

So for example, when a1 = 12, a2 = 13, it looks like alpha = pi, which seems to be confirmed for this particular instance by computing more terms and searching with more precision.  This is saying that the a_i are very biased mod 2pi/pi = 2, which seems experimentally to be very much the case even out to thousands of terms (for this particular example): the a_i are over 80% odd.  Proving something in this direction seems accessible, but some first efforts were unfruitful.

Note for example
  that in the extreme case where a_i = r mod m for all i, |f_N(2pi/m)|
  will be N on the nose.  If instead a_i is only ever congruent to r
  or s mod m, then if k = 1/(r-s) mod m, then again |f_N(2pi*k/m)| is
  close to N.

In general, one could imagine that for whatever initial values, the existence of such alpha is saying the a_i prefer a set of congruence classes mod m for some (possibly large) m.  In this case, alpha could be 2pi*k/m for some k.  (To see what k is, think what happens if the a_i happen to biased toward only two congruence classes r and s modulo m, then k would be such that kr and ks are all as close as possible mod m, say k = 1/(s-r) mod m.  If the preference is for more than two congruence classes, then the choice of k seems complicated (though still elementary): Given r1, ... rM mod m, find the k such that the k*r_i are all "as tightly clustered as possible".  There could be multiple k that do the job well, even if one of them is the very best.


### 20151221 Continued fractions


It is more likely that there is a sequence of m mod which the
congruence classes of a_i are increasingly clustered.  The continued
fraction of 2pi/alpha, which we're imagining is m/k, doesn't have some
really large coefficient where we would obviously truncate it.
Instead, for 2pi/alpha_(1,2) it is just

```[2; 2, 3, 1, 11, 1, 1, 4, 1, 1, 7, 2, 2, 6, 5, 3, 1, 3, 1, 2, 1, 3, 2, 1, 14, 2, 5, 3, 2, 3, 1, 2, 13, 2]```

For most of the alpha(i,j) that we computed to any meaningful
precision, either this continues to be true, or there is a very small
obvious modulus like 2.


There may not be a single best m: For example, one could imagine a sequence that is slightly biased to being odd, say 60% are 1 mod 2.  But then in fact it turns out that mod 4, it is more strongly biased, with 65% being only 2 or 3 mod 4.  And maybe in fact mod 12, 80% of terms are only ever 2, 3, 6, or 8 mod 12, and maybe in fact 99% are 2, 3, 6, 8, or 1 mod 48, and maybe you can catch more and more of the sequence with a slowly expanding set of congruence classes modulo quickly growing modulus.  If there is a "bias mod m" thing happening, this is probably the flavour it takes, but I'm happy to try to treat the approximation to alpha as indicating an "at least some bias toward some congruence classes mod some fixed m" phenomenon.

```
Format: c < 41000,  c*alpha mod 2pi,  |f_1000(c*alpha)| if "large enough"

1 2.5714474995 792.4132845820646
5421 3.7118834651791985 697.9602738649951
5423 2.571593156997551 667.6433815922704
10843 3.7120291226783593 430.5852814483841
10845 2.5717388144948927 382.76395161416815
19246 3.711096030579938 188.76234341111504
27109 3.7124660951667465 192.74127423547188
27111 2.572175787005108 192.3664947764681
30090 3.7113873455818975 251.33288416753032
30092 2.571097037391155 299.91484894398576
35512 3.7115330030792393 564.7163838117917
35514 2.5712426948884968 604.3427231679284
40934 3.711678660576581 767.1522122115849
40936 2.5713883524003904 780.2228219170503
```

### 20151229 Subgroup considerations

One possible source of bias mod 540 (say) would be if a_n tended to
miss certain whole subgroups mod 540.  This seems kind of attractive
based on the fact that 540 has a lot of divisors (though this isn't
always true of the other denominators in the continued fraction
expansion) and so Z/540 has many subgroups.  If, for example, at some
point it turned out that all the elements of the sequence were a fixed
list of subgroups mod 540, then because to generate future elements
all we do is add previous elements, we could only ever climb the
subgroup lattice and might continue to miss subgroups not containing
the ones we've seen.

Of course, this idea as stated is a non-starter because a_1 = 1
generates the whole group.  However, in the first 10000 terms, 1 only
shows up as a summand as 2+1, 3+1, and 47+1 and then never again, so
maybe some approximate version of this is true.

We compute using `experiment9`: 


```
Format: divisor of 540, number of a_n in that subgroup, number of integers 1..10000 in that subgroup
1 : 2625 =? 2666
2 : 1342 =? 1333
3 : 916 =? 888
4 : 1351 =? 1333
5 : 667 =? 666
6 : 443 =? 444
9 : 289 =? 296
10 : 346 =? 333
12 : 416 =? 444
15 : 228 =? 222
18 : 170 =? 148
20 : 334 =? 333
27 : 187 =? 148
30 : 104 =? 111
36 : 126 =? 148
45 : 90 =? 74
54 : 31 =? 74
60 : 104 =? 111
90 : 0 =? 37
108 : 89 =? 74
135 : 1 =? 37
180 : 75 =? 37
270 : 66 =? 18
540 : 0 =? 18
```

Notably, for 540, everything seems to show up about as often as
predicted except for 90, 135, and 540, which, surprisingly, show up
basically never.

We note that the absence of 90 is truly a "mod 540" phenomenon, since
mod 270, say, the elements that generate the subgroup generated by 180
mod 540 will be in the subgroup generated by 90 by 270, so we will get
about the expected number of these.  However, 135 is still absent mod
270.

This phenomenon is not really strong enough to account for the
substantial bias observed, however, and nor does it happen uniformly
among denominators of the continued fraction.  For 259, we observe: 

```
1 : 8381 =? 8339
7 : 1360 =? 1389
37 : 216 =? 231
259 : 43 =? 38
```

```
1 : 9051 =? 9057
11 : 909 =? 905
271 : 40 =? 33
2981 : 0 =? 3
```

```
1 : 4934 =? 4932
2 : 2468 =? 2466
4 : 2470 =? 2466
139 : 36 =? 35
157 : 33 =? 31
278 : 15 =? 17
314 : 19 =? 15
556 : 13 =? 17
628 : 12 =? 15
21823 : 0 =? 0
43646 : 0 =? 0
87292 : 0 =? 0
```

So why it is exactly that 90 and 135 never show up mod 540 is unclear,
but this could be random (they never showed up to begin with, and so
are unlikely to show up in future) and this isn't the cause of the
bias, most likely.

It is perhaps not terribly surprising that this isn't the answer:
clustering into two peaks mod 540 is not a particularly
algebraic-sounding phenomenon.

### 20151230 Evolving a distribution

Another possible source of the bias mod 540 is that some level of bias
simply happens by accident for a_i < 540 (maybe it is expected for at
least some modulus) and then, once you have this distribution, making
the next element of the sequence by picking two elements randomly from
this distribution (e.g. around 249 and 349 are the two peaks mod 540,
so maybe it's likely to pick e.g. 249 + 349 for the next congruence
class).

Under this assumption, we can evolve the distribution which starts
(using the first 10000 elements) like:

![initial distribution](figs/dist221,540.png)

and, under this evolution, gets smeared out to: 

![initial distribution](figs/dist221,540_ev.png)

Also unsurprising, but at least worth checking.

### 20151230 A correlation between summands and cos(alpha*a_n)

We note with interest the observation in the abstract of Steinerberger
that cos(alpha*a_n) < 0 for all a_n other than 2, 3, 47, and 69.  In
particular, thee were also the a_n that showed up most frequently as
summands in our earlier computation.

So we compute which how often each a_n appears as the smaller summand
of a later a_i and we compute cos(alpha*a_n) for each and sort by this
quantity.  We note what looks like a very strong correlation between
how often a_n shows up as a summand and cos(alpha*a_n) in the
resulting table, computed by `experiment11`:

```
Format: a_n, # a_i such that a_n is the smaller summand of a_i, cos(alpha_{1,2} * a_n) [a_i : a_i = a_n + a_*]

2 3630 0.41733070262870486 [6, 8, 13, 18, 28, 38, 99, 177, 182, 221, 238, ...
3 1356 0.13918577174048308 [11, 16, 72, 102, 148, 180, 209, 241, 319, 412, ...
47 1190 0.09314945116148635 [236, 253, 356, 363, 429, 456, 544, 720, 732, ...
69 999 0.07005004608158771 [175, 258, 451, 483, 566, 820, 1018, 1052, 1101, ...
102 836 -0.03533426907901862 [282, 441, 502, 585, 624, 646, 668, 949, 1125, ...
339 589 -0.0711987488469575 [695, 739, 751, 861, 905, 1186, 1230, 1770, 1853, ...
36 465 -0.10468116468523993 [138, 309, 602, 927, 1191, 1550, 1682, 2090, 2288, ...
273 305 -0.1403260484112354 [612, 673, 685, 1164, 1296, 1308, 1428, 1660, 1765, ...
8 181 -0.15065198092326257 [26, 36, 77, 114, 197, 324, 390, 991, 1470, 1602, ...
2581 85 -0.28740411578013597 [5795, 7459, 8947, 9443, 9619, 9641, 9663, 10677, ...
400 55 -0.2884371848720607 [3214, 3605, 3991, 12763, 13562, 13799, 13931, 15160, ...
983 50 -0.3160870169407304 [2445, 2748, 5514, 9553, 16121, 17135, 19427, 21626, ...
97 47 -0.3204537967301412 [316, 370, 497, 1252, 2581, 3622, 4057, 10366, 13628, ...
356 21 -0.33249578951071784 [983, 4118, 11226, 22676, 27817, 34104, 34969, 52789, ...
1155 16 -0.34664508490498336 [4878, 9132, 13733, 16047, 27883, 30886, 38920, 40931, ...
206 33 -0.35210835605364843 [522, 891, 1155, 1514, 2787, 4324, 9399, 11432, 20375, ...
53 35 -0.36400375717687433 [155, 409, 1208, 3038, 5049, 8421, 14945, 16648, 19480, ...
1308 18 -0.3694282571996273 [3029, 8368, 10501, 20937, 29147, 34784, 37765, 61029, ...
9193 8 -0.39212546438962775 [20419, 68914, 74099, 83323, 92073, 108317, 123718, 124864]
10831 4 -0.4275703245958347 [31878, 56503, 89101, 126493]
13 6 -0.4278336499870973 [82, 219, 273, 19642, 59734, 91748]
14892 2 -0.43270258250883076 [41620, 84500]
13531 3 -0.4379518060471682 [47279, 61451, 83139]
23883 2 -0.4409365382548865 [65740, 106394]
10269 1 -0.4463455890816818 [44816]
8368 1 -0.4494994835242297 [20968]
20643 0 -0.45329707066551345 []
316 5 -0.4579687420768522 [2897, 9509, 37809, 44377, 45132]
30315 1 -0.4603261098428447 [64928]
3205 1 -0.46097252485489365 [89057]
56437 0 -0.4623937767448221 []
4118 0 -0.46422907716529205 []
10247 0 -0.46696423929912617 []
3038 2 -0.4683040193517334 [7156, 95616]
57 3 -0.46925689465650167 [126, 339, 9250]
483 1 -0.4712894777269175 [80891]
60665 0 -0.4719075620475581 []
63646 0 -0.47285836474034365 []
39912 1 -0.4732674578528013 [128969]
1023 3 -0.47331956082924576 [2178, 20643, 65705]
69608 0 -0.4747583182234548 []
47920 0 -0.4752710197227344 []
123683 0 -0.47626799121658503 []
33274 1 -0.48172182638061584 [97956]
11586 0 -0.4822323173406816 []
75706 0 -0.482256288588461 []
128969 0 -0.48251534075104174 []
3723 1 -0.4834321003782536 [34038]
39653 1 -0.484451819395134 [84469]
42217 0 -0.484555301907165 []
```

If nothing else, this might suggest to us how to compute more a_n more
quickly: Rather than searching previous summands in order, search in
the order given by using cos(alpha*a_n) as the index.  Once we find a
sum that is unique, we only have to search all smaller sums, again in
this order.  This isn't easy, but 

## 20151231 Experiment 7, revisited

`experiment7` now uses a new (hopefully more refined) method for
computing alpha for various sequences and gives, after about a 5
minute computation for each:

```
1,2 (2.5714479999999997, 1586.3495100297046)
1,3 (2.8334960000000002, 1587.3716251000853)
2,3 (1.184224, 1497.1305405102953)
12,13 (3.141592, 1847.9732996138823)
```

We note that alpha_{2,3} is different from that in Steinberger.
Unclear whether this is a programming error or another peak or what.

### 20151231 Frequency of a_n as a summand, revisited

We run `experiment11(u1_2, alpha1_2)` to compute 

```
python test.py | grep '^2 ' | sed 's/.*[[]//;s/]//;s/, /\n/g'|nl -ba > ss2
python test.py | grep '^3 ' | sed 's/.*[[]//;s/]//;s/, /\n/g'|nl -ba > ss3
```

The data for i such that a_i = 2 + a_n (some n) is plotted here: 

![indices of elements with 2 as a summand](figs/ss2.png)

and for the a_i with 3, 47, 69, etc. as summands:

![indices of elements with 3 as a summand](figs/ss3.png)
![indices of elements with 47 as a summand](figs/ss47.png)
![indices of elements with 69 as a summand](figs/ss69.png)
![indices of elements with 102 as a summand](figs/ss102.png)
![indices of elements with 273 as a summand](figs/ss273.png)

Looks quite linear.  Indeed, computing the lines of best fit like:

```
gnuplot> f(x) = a*x+b
gnuplot> fit f(x) "data/ss2" u 1:2 via a,b
```

we get:

```
a_n   line of best fit      density of i with a_n a summand of a_i
=================================================================
2:    2.73325 x + 89.98     .36586481295161437848
3:    7.39206 x - 68.4331   .13528028722710584059
47:   8.21144 x + 103.419   .12178131971980553958
69:   10.0008 x + 130.561   .09999200063994880409
102:  11.9520 x + 16.9218   .08366800535475234270
273:  17.0196 x - 58.678    .05875578744506333873
36:   21.1842 x + 117.105   .04720499239999622360
339:  33.4172 x - 5.79674   .02992470943107142429
8:    57.7111 x - 229.248   .01732768912739490323
2581: 112.838 x - 415.223   .00886226271291586167
```

We can take these densities against the values of cos(alpha*x) and plot them: 

```
0.41733070262870486    .36586481295161437848
0.13918577174048308    .13528028722710584059
0.09314945116148635    .12178131971980553958
0.07005004608158771    .09999200063994880409
-0.03533426907901862   .08366800535475234270
-0.0711987488469575    .05875578744506333873
-0.10468116468523993   .04720499239999622360
-0.1403260484112354    .02992470943107142429
-0.15065198092326257   .01732768912739490323
-0.28740411578013597   .00886226271291586167
```

![plot of density against cos(ax)](figs/cos_density_correlation.png)

There is a definite correlation, but it isn't linear or particularly
obvious what the quantitative relationship is (particularly with this
small dataset).

A closelyrelated but perhaps more natural quantity that is similarly
correlated is simply the distance between alpha*a_n and the middle of
the interval [0,2pi], i.e.: `|(alpha*a_n mod 2pi) - pi|`:

```
2.001302345410207     .36586481295161437848
1.7104354622693787    .13528028722710584059
1.6640810135019244    .12178131971980553958
1.6409037891182088    .09999200063994880409
1.5354547010472182    .08366800535475234270
1.499537286127282     .05875578744506333873
1.4659230278960003    .04720499239999622360
1.4300056129761636    .02992470943107142429
1.4195685791285513    .01732768912739490323
1.2792808257332915    .00886226271291586167
```

We note that the two closest terms to the middle of this interval are
11 and 10833.  Even though these are very much outside of the two main
bulges in the distribution that go from about 2.1-3.0 and 3.2-4.2,
they still show up rarely as summands.  For a striking visualisation
of the frequency of things as summands, see [this file](data/ax_by_dist_from_pi).
